Michael Sarlos
February 12, 2020
CART-263

Project 1 Myth of Sisyphus: Artist Statement

This game is designed to convey an inevitable outcome for the planet earth, just as Sisyphus capturing was inevitable outcome for escaping Death. As humanity continues to live unsustainably our plastics continue to pile up with little signs of disappearing. The average plastic takes up to 500 years to decompose, this being said our natural environments are already infested with plastics harming and killing wildlife. It is very difficult for our society to notice this immediate effect as our waste management systems are designed to flow this waste out from the metropolises and housing districts and into the natural ecosystems. As much as this is a material process, it also promotes a false aesthetic which hides the impact of our actions rendering our consciousnesses free from guilt. This process’ aesthetic facilitates the industrial demand for cost efficiency at the cost of material sustainability, as it divides the consumer from the negative repercussions of their consumptions.

The greatest issue with this system is that there is a finite number of natural environments we can destroy and that these ecosystems are incredibly important for our survival. The concept of dividing the consumer from the long-term negatives of their actions is with no doubt promoted by capitalistic mechanisms. As long as consumers cannot physically perceive the effects of their actions, they will continue to only see the benefits of the decisions. Benefits such as a drink being cheaper due to an efficient production cost or the ability to easily throw away the container in any trashcan. I actually find the action shaming people who throw garbage on the ground to be not fully thought out. The reality is Canada no longer recycles, let alone most recyclables end up in the garbage anyway, thus these plastics are just sent to never ending dumps or into rivers to harm wildlife. Why not fill our metropolises with our trash and experience the full effects of our actions? Wouldn’t the aesthetic of this waste proposition be more informative of our long-term repercussions and help us in the long-term?

Furthermore, I am designing a game which will communicate the ironic truth behind repercussions of destroying our planet. The game is set in the year 2064 once the planet has been deemed inhabitable to all the pollution. The goal of the game is to save everyone on earth by launching them into individual rockets. It will permit you to launch as many rockets as you desire. This task is made to be impossible as there is no point in which the game will end, other than you clicking the Give Up button. This interaction is based off the myth of Sisyphus as I believe there are parallels between Sisyphus escaping Death and the human race thinking they can think design they’re way out of anything. Just as humans create commodities and processes which divide themselves from the perceptual consequences of their actions, they won’t be able to create their way off this planet… And if they do shame on them!
