Michael Sarlos 40018365
Pippin Barr
CART 263

Project 2 Artist Statement

The internet was initially created to liberate information in the form of free
access. Although this approach is idealistic it wasn’t realistic in accepting
the competitive nature of capitalism. As the web developed throughout the years
its functionality improved, but its initial goal warped as people began using
the web to generate ad revenue. This led to website’s valuing traffic over
necessary providing honest unaltered information which in my opinion was the
beginning of the end.

There exists a certain predatory nature in how people and companies generate
traffic which now a days involves luring young susceptible minds. Concepts such
as over stimulation and flashy images have now become the worm on the hook for
these content creators. This strategy is not new at all, but the means in which
it is used could be seen as manipulative. Children’s shows in the past have
often used these strategies to draw children’s attention, but the end goal was
to educate these young minds through explaining numbers and words. Shows like
Sesame Street uses colorful backgrounds and catchy song segments, but the end
goal is not to overstimulate or hypnotize the child into a submissive state.

 The YouTube interface thrives off this submissive state as children are often
 independently in control of an iPad and what they click on next. Furthermore,
 content creators acknowledge this and try to create addictive stimulus in
 order to keep the child’s attention so they will click on the next video.
 This comes in the form of cheap and flashy thumbnails as the recommended
 section allows kids to click on videos from other channels. In result, content
 creators are now competing in creating the most graphic thumbnail which has
 now taken the word “graphic” to a new level. When flashy colors and exaggerated
 facial expressions aren’t enough, content creators will resolve to baiting
 children with adult concepts as what better to attract a child attention then
 with something, they “are not” supposed to see.

Trends like these can be seen in mobile apps, as there is a huge popularity in
games with minimal gameplay interaction alongside rampant rewards. Resource
management games and collectible games have taken these flashy rewarding
aesthetics and made them into the games sole function. With limited interaction
or challenge these apps are using the same predatory hypnotic strategies as
these children videos except their pay to succeed structures make them even
worse.

Money Cat is a game which takes negative aspects from both of these phenomena
and combines them into an ironic interactive experience. The goal of the game is
to pay 25$ so a cartoon cat can replicate your emotions depending on how you
feel. It consists of a very simplistic feedback loop which responds to specific
voice commands which declare how you feel. The idea of having the cat sympathize
with you by having it repeat it is feeling the same emotion as you is designed
to mock the simplistic natures of these addictive experiences. In addition, the
flashy aesthetics of the game act as a cover up for contentless content.
Furthermore, by creating this game I hope to mock and bring up new conversation
surrounding the ethics of online content, as it should avoid abusing over
stimulating ploys.
