Michael Sarlos (40018365)

Pippin Barr

CART-263

April 20, 2020

Final Project Artist Statement

For my final project, I was inspired by the HAL 9000 suggestion as I think there is an ironic yet cryptic process in creating a fictional AI. The relationship between man and technology has been portrayed through all forms of fictional media and has used all types of metaphors to draw pseudo similarities between the two. HAL 9000 pioneered these false parallels through its personification of the interface. Although early for its time, the story of the 2001 Space Odyssey highlights no matter how human a computer may appear it is still performed and designed to serve a purpose. Whether this purpose serves humans or not is another question.

For my project, I created my own iteration of HAL 9000 called PAL 3000. The name PAL derives from his updated dialogue designed to tackle the question “Can humans and robots become friends?”. With the rise of A.I. and social media, our identities are truly becoming processed and virtualized for perhaps another purpose than our own. As these technologies consume us, we must question is it serving us, are we serving it or are we both embodied as a single system both serving each other? Although these questions are complex and can be answered in many different ways, I still think it’s important to stimulate the dialogue. Furthermore, PAL 3000 consists of 5 satirical questions all concerning cyberidentity. Each question’s input will provide a specific output that will all be compiled into a final message from PAL. The first question will ask how many Facebook friends they have and the second will ask how many real friends they have. This is designed to have users question what really differs between real identities and cyber identities. The next question asks the user if a robot could be their friend. This goes one step further, as they could interpret it as Pal paralleling robots with real identities and cyberidentities. Although the A.I. is designed to be your friend, its dialogue is ironically intended to convince you rather than actually be your friend. The fourth question follows this trend as it tries to suggest to you that you are already friends. This plays into the theme of embodiment as it begins to suggest we are already products of technology and thus cyborg. The final question really goes over the top by suggesting “We are one”. This escalation is intended to imbue HAL’s task-orientated nature with social media’s false sense of sociability.

Although questions 1 and 2 are answered with number values, questions 3 through 5 each have three multiple choice answers. The answers are designed to represent pro-computer, anti-computer and actual computer responses (so you can speak to PAL in his own language). Depending on what you answer PAL will construct an opinion of whether you can actually become friends. This intended to give the user a laugh as the final response will also contain two randomized elements. In conclusion, I believe humans have already become cyborg through the use of AI. The fact that we rely on these technologies in our day to day lives for answers and guidance is nothing wrong. Regardless, we must be careful what we intend these technologies for and whether they are actually helping us as a friend.
